# Zynq AXI DMA transfer with Scatter/Gather

This is a simple C snippet to demonstrate how DMA transfer with scatter/gather works on a Zynq 7020. It is used to run as a Linux program. 

In contrast to other examples it makes no usage of the Xilinx Linux drivers, so there is no need to recompile your kernel from [linux-xlnx](https://github.com/Xilinx/linux-xlnx).

It maps several memory areas to set the AXI registers at the programming logic, and the memory wich is intended to transfer to the FPGA (S2MM: Stream to Mapped Memory), and write back from FPGA to the memory (MM2S: Mapped Memory to Stream). 

According to the Xilinx documentation [**AXI DMA v7.1 - LogiCORE IP Product Guide**](http://www.xilinx.com/support/documentation/ip_documentation/axi_dma/v7_1/pg021_axi_dma.pdf), it constructs a descriptor chain. Each descriptor contains the address of the next descriptor, the target memory buffer address and the related control settings (width of the transfer, first or last transfer).

To test the successful transfer of the memory content, the source memory will be initialized with an increasing counter and the target memory with zeros.  

## Compatibility 

It is tested and runs without problems on a Parallella board with Zynq 7020 (under Ubuntu 14.04 Parallella (Zynq7020) headless image from Jan 30th 2015 release). It should also work with any Zed board with an Zynq 7020 under the assumption that 1GByte memory is available.

## Build  

Compile it native under Linux ARM with 

```
gcc -Wall -o zynq-axi-dma-sg zynq-axi-dma-sg.c
```

*Note: because of the memory map with /dev/mem it can only run as root.*

## Run

First you need to configure the devicetree to prevent the kernel from using the memory area shared with the programming logic of the Zynq (`mem=512M`). To get the maximum performance it is helpful to bind all linux processes to one cpu (`isolcpus=1`).

```text
chosen {
	linux,stdout-path = "/amba@0/serial@e0001000";
	bootargs = "root=/dev/mmcblk0p2 rw earlyprintk rootfstype=ext4 rootwait mem=512M isolcpus=1";
};
```

On the FPGA side there must be a programming logic with AXI Stream configured. A good start is the [parallella-fpga-dummy-io](https://github.com/Kirill888/parallella-fpga-dummy-io). There is also a howto concerning editing and compiling the devicetree. 

To enable Scatter/Gather in Vivado, open the block design and double click on the `axi_dma_0` and set the buffer register length to 23 , the memory map read width to 1024, stream data width and max burst size to 32.

Also in the block design the following addresses must be set:

```vhdl
DATA_SG		0x1F00_0000		64K		0x1F00_FFFF
DATA_MM2S	0x2000_0000		512M	0x3FFF_FFFF
DATA_S2MM	0x2000_0000		512M	0x3FFF_FFFF
DATA		0x4040_0000		64K		0x4040_FFFF  
```

*Note: both the memory mapped to stream and the stream to memory mapped area are set to the same addresses.*

Start the transfer with:

```bash
taskset -1 ./zynq-axi-dma-sg
```

The `taskset -c 1` advises the kernel to use the second core for the task. Especially for massive memory mapped operations this results in at least 10% higher performance. 

If nothing goes wrong, the following status messages should appear several times:

```cpp
Memory-mapped to stream status (0x00010008@0x04):
MM2S_STATUS_REGISTER status register values:
 running SGIncld
Stream to memory-mapped status (0x00010008@0x34):
S2MM_STATUS_REGISTER status register values:
 running SGIncld
```

After ~90 times it should finish with the success message:

```cpp
Memory-mapped to stream status (0x0001100a@0x04):
MM2S_STATUS_REGISTER status register values:
 running idle SGIncld IOC_Irq
Stream to memory-mapped status (0x0001100a@0x34):
S2MM_STATUS_REGISTER status register values:
 running idle SGIncld IOC_Irq
```

In both channels, the status register `idle` (bit 1) and `ÌOC_Irq` (bit 12) are set. This means the engine passed the tail descriptor without errors and fired the `IRQ on complete`. If there is only one process communicating with the AXI engine, there is no need to manually halt the engine.  

*Note: According to the Xilinx LogiCore documentation, the MM2S side is faster. In this configuration (blockwidth, length of chain) the stream to memory mapped transfers need 10% more time to finish the transfers.*


## Performance

This sample transfers 10 frames with 64000 Bytes each from memory to the FPGA and writes the received data back to a different memory address.

It takes between 0.001659 and 0.001640 sec to complete both processes. This means that in total it reads and writes with a bandwidth of 390 MByte/s each. According to the Xilinx documentation **LogiCORE IP Product Guide** (page 9) this rate is equivalent to ~98% of the theoretical limit of the DDR memory.

Why is it faster than the Xilinx driver? One explanation could be the absence of threads. When the Xilinx driver is used, the register polling is usually wrapped in threads.

## Notes

The C code is generated by XSLT templates. This should explain the absence of functions. It's  used as a small part of a much larger toolchain which configures not only the code for the ARM side but also the VHDL code. 

For further informations on AXI DMA transfer there is an good article to start at [Lauri's Blog](http://lauri.võsandi.com/hdl/zynq/xilinx-dma.html). 

At [FPGADeveloper](http://www.fpgadeveloper.com/2014/08/using-the-axi-dma-in-vivado.html) there is an example of how to use the AXI DMA (Scatter/Gather enabled) engine as standalone  (https://github.com/fpgadeveloper/microzed-axi-dma/blob/master/SDK/hello_world/src/helloworld.c). Unfortunately, it also uses the Xilinx drivers. In principle it should be possible to use `zynq-axi-dma-sg` instead.
